When performing a typical doubling
dilution, begin with five empty tubes
labeled as shown, ready to prepare
five dilutions of a patient's sample.
Each sample in this sequence of dilutions
will be double
the dilution of the previous one.
Note that microplates can also be used
to perform the doubling dilution process.
However, this video will demonstrate
how to perform this process with test tubes.
Add 200 microlitres of saline
to each of the tubes.
Ensure that you also have the patient's
sample ready.
Using a pipette, transfer 200 microlitres of patient sample
to the first tube and mix.
The plasma could come
from a primary patient's sample
or a plasma subsample.
Then, transfer
200 microlitres of dilution 2
to the next tube down the line and mix.
Do the same for dilution 8,
dilution 16,
and finally, dilution 32.
You now have a series of dilutions
of your original sample.
The original sample is generally referred
to as the “neat sample,”
“the neat dilution,” or just “neat.”
In scientific publications,
you may see it referred to as “1.”
The last sample in the dilution sequence
will have double the volume
of the other dilutions.
In this example,
the 32 dilution contains 400 microlitres,
while the other dilution tubes contain
200 microlitres.
If your initial testing regime fails
to reach an end point -
- the dilution after which an antibody
can no longer be unequivocally detected -
- you should always have enough diluted
sample to continue the dilution process.
Continuing the dilution process from 32
will increase
the dilution factors to 64, 128,
and so on.